we choose to go to the moon in this
decade and do the other things not
because they are easy but because they
are hard because that goal will serve to
organize and measure the best of our
energies and skills because that
challenge is one that we are willing to
accept one we are unwilling to postpone
and one we intend to win and the others
too I'm at Cape Canaveral this is
Kennedy Space Center perhaps no other
place on earth has quite the level of
optimism as this place is demonstrated
over the years problems are soluble and
although at times there have been
missteps in the exploration of the
cosmos people have lost their lives have
been terrible errors that have been made
those errors typically have been
corrected if we persevere if we continue
if we recognize that although problems
are inevitable
they are always soluble then the next
step won't merely be the Moon or Mars
it'll be the Stars
[Music]
[Applause]
you
welcome to top cast and my latest in the
series on the beginning of infinity this
has to be very close to my favorite
chapter in the book I've only recently
arrived home from a visit to the United
States it's yeah sure it's been a long
time since I've actually been there but
it was positively buzzing just the way I
remembered it it's really optimistic
it's got there's a roamer of optimism
about it in a way that I guess the
locals have probably simply become
accustomed to things are tall and bright
industrious and diverse but it's all
very wonderful this optimism is etched
into its history so deeply don't I say
that I'm kind of comparing it to places
that maybe I'm biased in having visited
recently areas of Europe and Asia and of
course Australia and speaking of which
speaking of Australia this surrounds
they they aren't really setting the tone
for the brightness that is this chapter
and the optimism that is this chapter so
I think I know of somewhere better now
first started preparing to read through
this chapter and to make comments on it
around the time that Avengers in game
the last big Marvel superhero movie came
out and also around the time the final
episodes of Game of Thrones were aired
but actually I've kind of been more
excited about this episode than either
of those things because it's chapter 9
and chapter 9 is optimism I don't know
if David did this by design but being
chapter 9 this place is optimism right
in the center of the book at the end of
this chapter we'll have covered exactly
1/2 in terms of the number of chapters
of the beginning of infinity the
optimism in this chapter is unique now
there have been physicists who have
noticed before that that which is not
prohibited by the laws of physics must
be possible but David has developed this
into a genuine worldview that has
infinite reach and every single demand
of inquiry it doesn't matter the subject
problems are soluble now I mentioned the
Avengers movie endgame probably the
biggest movie of this year certainly in
terms of cost it will be actually in
that movie we hear about the Deutsch
proposition now I don't know what the
Deutsch proposition is and I don't think
David does either I'd like to know what
the script writers were thinking but
for our age actually something more
along the lines of deutschen optimism in
Chapter nine could certainly serve as
the Deutsch proposition maybe something
like the couplet problems are soluble
problems are inevitable or indeed his
principle of optimism his definition of
what optimism is being that all evils
are due to a lack of knowledge optimism
is the the rational stance given our
ability to create knowledge it's tied to
this problem-solving attitude and
placing the problem at the heart of
epistemology rather than the chimera of
justification optimism is also connected
to physics because problems are soluble
because solutions found are physically
possible transformations that allow us
to overcome the obstacle that we've
called a problem these transformations
are possible because they begin as
computations creations in the minds of
universal explainers people so here we
have chapter 9 connected to the
beginning of the beginning of infinity
how explanations are what transform the
world and how these explanations are
about what is physically possible in
many cases actually what is prohibited
what is physically not possible when it
comes to physics morality and so forth
optimism is about wealth creation and
the conditions under which decisions are
best made to achieve outcomes at a non
entrench error you can see the chapter
on choices for that and optimism is
about the connection between
epistemology or abstract knowledge
creation and physical resources and
we're going to see that in the chapter
on unsustainable optimism does not say
that it will be done it says it can be
done and what it is is to solve our
actual problems to do this takes
resources and to know that a resource
even is a resource takes knowledge to
extract the resources and then use them
to create more knowledge takes wealth
and so the cycle leading to progress
continues chapter 9 optimism the
possibilities that lie in the future
are infinite when I say it is our duty
to remain optimists this includes not
only the openness of the future but also
that which all of us contribute to it by
everything we do we are all responsible
for what the future holds install thus
it is our duty not to prophesy evil but
rather to fight for a better
world Karl Popper misses the framework
1984 Martin Rees suspects that our
civilization was lucky to survive the
20th century well throughout the Cold
War there was always a possibility that
another world war would break out this
time fought with hydrogen bombs and that
civilization would be destroyed that
danger seems to have receded but in
rhesus book our final century published
in 2003 he came to the worrying
conclusion that civilization now had a
50% chance of surviving the 21st century
so Paul's almost immediately to remark
that this chapter could be read
alongside the discussion that riesen
Doge had at the Royal Society for the
encouragement of arts manufacturing
Commerce or the RSI as they call
themselves what was illuminating that
discussion was the questions that were
asked as well as a discussion between
recent age so I wouldn't say that
pessimism is merely connected to or even
intimately tied up with bad ideas like
authoritarianism anti humanism coercion
it's not merely intimately connected
with these things it is at a deeper
level of explanation it's a more
fundamental mistake than those others
those others are derivative of pessimism
pessimism is at the heart of these bad
ideas they're motivating it is
motivating these other bad ideas as well
pessimism about all sorts of things not
just about humans about knowledge about
technology in the discussion between
recent which a number of people asked
about the inequality that comes with
technology there this is really part of
the cultural discussion at the moment
about how certain people in Silicon
Valley have just so much money and so
much power that really we need to start
thinking about ways in which government
can intervene because otherwise these
people are going to have too much power
perhaps they already have too much power
and so the concern there is that
technology breeds inequality of course
we always assume in these discussions
don't leave that inequality is bad that
that's just assumed that we don't go any
deeper because the discussion rarely
moves beyond the idea
that inequality simply is bad on its
face that's an assumption that's a
premise we begin with and of course if
you begin with that assumption then
you're led to all sorts of weed
conclusions rather than thinking that
inequality is actually a good thing that
it is a sign that people are pursuing
their own interests to the degree that
they can and the degree that they want
to so when people think they've seen
something like inequality being
magnified or amplified by something like
technology then they call for things
like redistribution they call for force
Manresa in that discussion explicitly
calls for redistribution others just saw
inequality as a bad thing and if you
watch that discussion you you can hear
one question and ask a question well
it's actually more of a very long
statement actually there was no question
mark at the end of it but I thought it
contained a very important insight and
and she observed that far from
technology increasing inequality
technology like say smartphones has
given billions of people worldwide among
some of the poorest people in the world
access to information like never before
it really does level the playing field
and yes if you provide value to billions
of people around the world it's not
surprising that you become a billionaire
but in doing so you've helped so many
people you've actually leveled the
playing field the reason that people
have smartphones in the third world now
or what used to be called the third
world is because they have sufficient
wealth to purchase their smartphones and
those smartphones are worth more to them
than what they would otherwise have done
with that money this is a wonderful
thing this is a glorious thing that
really we should be praising
but this is another fracture point
between between optimists who are so
scarce so rare as to be one may as well
put them on the endangered species list
and the Pez nests who are calm the
fracture point is what do you think when
you look at our situation with
technology when you stand back and you
assess what's going on do you think no
this is terrible
some people are getting too powerful and
too wealthy this technology Apple is
getting too powerful Google is getting
too powerful
Facebook is getting too powerful is that
what you're concentrating on is that
what you're focusing on are you focused
on the few individuals at the top of
these companies who happen to have a lot
of wealth and who are gaining a lot of
wealth or are you focused on the great
good that has been done by these
companies for so many people around the
world and that if you look ahead there's
great hope in this or do you see a
dystopia where these people these these
Machiavellian mr. burns like are are
wringing their hands thinking about all
the ways in which they can use their
power to corrupt all of society indeed
we've seen recently that there are all
sorts of reasons to disagree with the
politics of the people in Silicon Valley
but the way in which to combat bad ideas
is with good ideas not with force
optimism says that we can create
knowledge in order to overcome the evils
in society and some of those evils are
simply bad political ideas which many of
the people at the top of Silicon Valley
indeed have and do you think when you
see massive amounts of wealth created
created mind you not taken from
somewhere else created created through
knowledge instantiated in technology and
in sold to billions of people around the
world because because those people those
billions of people see it as such a
benefit do you think to yourself let us
confiscate that wealth that wealth
concentrated in the hands of a few is
dangerous or do you think what a
wonderful thing that these companies can
now go ahead and make even better
products in the future because if they
don't they're going to go the way of so
many companies prior to them would you
go out of business I think it's a really
entertaining and
formative discussion the RSA discussion
on optimism between Deutsch and Rison if
you're reading this chapter it's a
wonderful adjunct to add to your
understanding of what David writes about
here so David has just said of Reese
that Reese calculated there was only a
50% chance of surviving the 21st century
and David goes on writing again this was
because of the danger that newly created
knowledge would have catastrophic
consequences for example Reese thought
it likely that civilization destroying
weapons particularly biological ones
would soon become so easy to make the
terrorist organizations or even
malevolent individuals could not be
prevented from acquiring them he also
feed accidental catastrophes such as the
escape of genetically modified
microorganisms from a laboratory
resulting in a pandemic of an incurable
disease intelligent robots and
nanotechnology engineering on an atomic
scale could in the long run be even more
threatening he wrote and it is not
inconceivable that physics could be
dangerous too for instance it's been
suggested that elementary particle
accelerators that briefly create the
conditions that are in some respects
more extreme than any since the Big Bang
might destabilize the very vacuum of
space and destroy our entire universe
Reese pointed out that for his
conclusion to hold it's not necessary
for any one of those catastrophes to be
at all probable because we need be
unlucky only once and we incur the risk
of fresh every time progress is made in
a variety of fields he compared this
with playing Russian roulette
our pause there in this chapter david
concentrates on two great public
intellectuals one is martin rees the
astronomer royal a fantastically
accomplished astronomer physicist
scientist public intellectual the other
is thomas malthus who many great public
intellectuals to today turn to to talk
about but really there are a smorgasbord
of public intellectuals that david might
have talked about many of my own
intellectual heroes people like sam
Harris or Douglas Murray almost anyone
is written a nonfiction book in the last
twenty years anyone with a podcast
perhaps my favorite of all of the great
pessimists of the 20th and 21st century
is of course Nick Bostrom now Nick
Bostrom doesn't use Russian roulette
he's not even pulling rabbits out of
hats but he is pulling balls out of urns
and he compares human creativity to
pulling a ball out of an urn and so far
we've been pulling useful balls out of
the urn and sometimes the useful ball
that comes out of the urn can have good
and bad applications but what he was
very worried about is the black ball the
black ball that might be pulled out of
the under black ball according to
bostrm is a technology that is just so
no faras though there is no upside and
it will destroy the civilization which
pulls it out of the earth if you want a
summary of Bostrom's
ideas you can just google him and go to
his own website he's written many books
that concentrate on uber pessimism
pessimism that talks about existential
risk at the end of the future so he's
very animated about sam harris had him
on the podcast earlier in 2019 a very
good interview a very great insight into
just how deep pessimism can go they
talked about all sorts of thing one one
thing that just to speak to what David
has mentioned there all these different
things that could go wrong and that
people are worried about Bostrom's
worried about rather the same things
that recess won't about which is what
Harris is worried about and in Harris
and bostrm agreed with each other that
for example in the future we might have
something like everyone might have their
own 3d printer where you can 3d print
rather crisper style your own biological
add-ons in order to fix up your own
genetic code when it starts to go wrong
over time and what Harris was really
worried about and bostrom kind of agreed
was that with such a technology where
everyone at home can just 3d print their
own biological organisms or biological
fixes to problems that go wrong it could
also be used for evil and so you only
need one person out of the billions that
are on earth who decide to use this
technology for evil
that could kill millions or perhaps
billions of people maybe they could
genetically engineer in their home 3d
biological printer the virus that will
be as easily spread as the common cold
but more virulent than any virus we've
ever encountered before a virus that
will be more deadly than any virus we've
encountered before and they both agreed
that this was a terrible existential
risk what confused me is why is it that
the same 3d printing technology can't
also be used to print the cure for that
particular virus if we're that advanced
that we're printing viruses then we're
also printing the T cells that can
attack the viruses okay and so David
writes but there is a crucial difference
between the human condition and Russian
Roulette the probability of winning at
Russian Roulette is unaffected by
anything that the player may think or do
within its rules it is a game of pure
chance
in contrast the future of civilization
depends entirely on what we think and do
if civilization Falls that will not be
something that just happens to us you're
with the outcome of choices that people
make if civilization survives that will
be because people succeed in solving the
problems of survival and that too will
not have happened by chance so I'll
pause here and I want to take a I won't
say a deep dive a shallow dive into some
of the work of Nick Bostrom on this if
there's anyone as I think I've hinted on
who can compete with man Reese for a
rationally minded super pessimist it
will be Nick Bostrom bostrm has a
number of different theses about how the
world's going to end or civilization
might hend or all of humanity will
destroy itself or will be destroyed and
so on and so forth one of his latest
papers on this is called the vulnerable
world hypothesis now when I look at Nick
Bostrom's page as interesting as it is
like his book super intelligence that
I've written an extensive critique of I
find it to
this isn't supposed to be just purely
pejorative that it is genuinely the
sense that I get in in reading some of
his stuff super intelligence was very
much like this it read to me like a
science fiction novel it seemed to me to
just ignore reality in so many ways
it certainly ignored the ways in which
we know knowledge is created and so if
you ignore certain things about how
epistemology actually works how physics
actually works then yes some of his
conclusions follow follow from false
epistemology follow from physics that we
don't operate with him so to be specific
he is a strong proponent for Bayesian
ISM he believes in inductive reasoning
that given the past you can predict the
future we know this is false the future
looks nothing like the past whatever has
happened previously is not guaranteed to
happen tomorrow if you'd like to know
more about this just google my name
Brett Hall and induction and on Google
and it will bring up an article of mine
about induction or of course go to the
fabric of reality by david deutsch and
read the sections there on induction or
go to papa any one of his works about
induction objective knowledge is a good
one now because bostrm is someone who
likes to prophesy the future and likes
to use inductive type reasoning in an
attempt to do so of course he can't
actually do this there's no such thing
as inductive reasoning so you cannot you
cannot validly predict the future given
the current state of events what you can
do is to take a good explanation
something like Newton's laws and predict
and the evolution of a simple physical
system over time that's actual
prediction you can take a good
explanation of the laws we understand
chemistry operates under we might say
that given a good explanation for
example an acid plus a base when
combined together will typically give
you a salt plus water and so if we have
a special case if I take a
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide
and I mixed these two things together my
prediction will be based on that good
explanation about how these two
chemicals acid and base react together I
can predict the given those particular
examples of acid and base I will get
sodium chloride plus water
this happens because there is a fund
there is a fundamental principle that
we're operating with in a good
scientific explanation about how certain
chemical reactions work this is not the
kind of thing that Nick Bostrom ever has
what Nick Bostrom has what Martin Rees
has what any of the great pessimistic
prophets of our time have wild guesses
wild guesses about the ways in which if
people choose to do nothing or choose to
do the wrong thing that calamities will
ensue that catastrophe will follow but
this is not prediction this is prophecy
this is assuming the worst the worst
will happen but why worry why worry
about what the Marten races and the Nick
Bostrom's of the world prophesied well
because lots of people listen and lots
of people listen I guess there's a few
sociological factors involved here
psychological factors my own the pet
theory is that people like watching
disaster movies really we like we would
get excited by the great asteroid that's
heading towards the city or the virus
that is taking over the world or the
aliens that have come to wreak havoc
upon humanity and it's exciting to think
you know what might happen during such a
situation these are ways in which we
entertain ourselves and just because you
I don't know have a philosophy degree or
you have a serious podcast doesn't mean
you're immune from that kind of
entertainment you may not want to spend
your time talking about the movie the
War of the Worlds you know no one will
take that seriously or deep impact or
terminator but it could be fun too
to a philosopher who basically believes
in the reality of all of those kinds of
things and how they're going to happen
and has written papers on it with
equations and mathematics to try and
convince people that yes the worst is
coming there's a market for this kind of
idea but how seriously should we take
these things not only how seriously
should we take them what are the
alternatives well let's just drill down
on we'll just pick two of okay three
we'll pick three have Bostrom's ideas
firstly super intelligence that I've
been very animated about his his thesis
here is that systems can be created such
that they're better at us at thinking in
every single domain that they will take
over the world and they might for
example turn the world into paper clips
this is one idea and sam harris puts it
as you can simply imagine a system like
we have today that is better at every
single human a playing chess or better
at playing the go game or better at
driving than any human can or better at
shooting a gun that any human can i say
okay so iterate for every single
capacity that we can program then you
have a system that is by definition
better at everything we know about then
a person is so therefore we have a super
intelligence and if we program that in
the wrong way or if it's that to think
to itself
these people are superfluous or this
planet is superfluous or i want to
follow my programming which will allow
me to turn the planet into paperclips
will be unable to stop it because by
definition it's better at us and faster
than us and stronger than us and
everything this is false because the way
that people think is not by slavishly
following an algorithm it's by
creatively conjecturing new ideas new
solutions things that people have never
previously thought up before and so if
you do have a system which is better at
us at everything that we can program
we only need to find one thing not in
that list of programs and we can thwart
that thing the creativity will always be
a system that lacks it and of course if
you have a system that does have
creativity then you can teach it then
it's not going to turn the world into
paperclips because it can be persuaded
that turning the world in the paperclips
is not a good idea in fact it can
persuade itself and it would prior to
doing so if it was genuinely creative
and if it's not creative
again the only thing you need to do is
to be creative yourself to outwit it ok
so that's super intelligence I still
recommend that people read it because if
they're interested in this particular
idea it seems to me to be the best work
defending that particular thesis
terrible though it is I still think that
it's worth reading because then you
understand what other people are getting
at when they argue that the robots are
going to take over the world
this is the kind of thinking that
underpins their doomsday scenarios so
next is the vulnerable world hypothesis
and again
bostrm is animated by in the same way
that Reese is that these terrible things
have a certain chance of happening and
so therefore there's a probability
associated with them and therefore we
can use these probabilities plug them
into bayes's theorem and predict likely
outcomes
one thing about bostrm that Bostrom's
writing I should say that works me and
I've mentioned this kind of thing before
is the proliferation of nomenclature
this use of acronyms and just confusing
terminology we're really it's a very
simple idea that's being talked about
and so in the vulnerable world
hypothesis very early on in the paper
which is he he talks about the reason
why the vulnerable world hypothesis is
true is because of something called the
semi and market default condition
and they yeah
what semi anarchic pains is that people
are competing how with their different
ideas and the default condition hidden
means that the world gets destroyed by
default okay so why what's going on here
well he imagines a situation where there
is a technology produced that is so
powerful and that there's many different
people that have different ideas about
how to use the technology but you only
need one of them out of the millions
maybe billions of people that have
access to this technology who decide to
use it in a way that can cause the
destruction of the entire planet so
therefore in a situation where you've
got Anarchy okay so no one's in control
of these different people with this
super powerful technology then by
default it has to destroy the world
that's the semi anarchic default
condition sounds very complicated but
really that's that's the basic idea okay
so if if for example it's kind of it's
kind of like saying that if the planet
was ruled by gods each of whom have the
capacity to destroy the world then the
world will get destroyed by default
because at least one of these many many
gods is going to be a crazy evil god
that wants to do that the problem here
is that of course with the vulnerable
world hypothesis is that it assumes that
no knowledge could possibly be created
to stop the evil person from using the
world destructing technology but why
we're not told why we're just told that
there is such a technology and by the
way the technology is the black ball
okay so
bostrm doesn't pull rabbits out of hats
he pulls balls out of urns and so far
we've been pulling ball telephones and
buy a ball he means a bit of creativity
ok the urn is well the urn is the
creativity of humanity and the ball is
some object of that creativity like a
piece of technology and so far we've
been pulling stuff out and sometimes
it's good sometimes it's bad but all we
need to do is to pull out one black ball
which is a
of Technology it's altogether bad and
will destroy the civilization which
pulls it out of the urn why should it
destroy the civilization that puts it at
the earth well because the Semyon are
keep default condition because even if
the overwhelming majority of people in
the society don't want to use the
technology that's discovered at least
one person will anyway need one to
destroy the entire world why can't
anyone stop them that's the definition
of a black ball in other words it's
unrealistic there is no such technology
there's no such technology that if one
person got hold of it it could destroy
the entire planet without anyone doing
anything about it
so Bostrom's solution of course and in
his solution to all of these things is
some kind of authoritarianism some kind
of top-down imposition so he course he
begins with pessimism about people and
he's led to this idea that that we need
we can't trust people so we need some
kind of authoritarianism we need a
strong man at the top who can tell the
rest of us what to do okay it's it's an
appeal to this philosopher-king idea
this this very this very ancient idea
going back to Plato two and a half
thousand years ago that the only people
that can be trusted the great
philosophers and the great philosophers
knowing everything that needs to be
known will direct society in the way
that is best in other words an
assumption of non fallibilism on the
part of or a lesser form of fallibilism
amongst the philosophers and the smart
people and the strong men at the top
then among the general populace who
cannot be trusted he's got this bostrm
has this this section of the paper the
vulnerable world hypothesis again
entertaining read as far as it goes I
find it a little bit like science
fiction he's got this thing called the
the type 1 vulnerability and he speaks
about this actually in his podcast with
Sam Harris as well and the essential
idea here is that it's possible for
individuals to become too
Howard to create harm and this is a
terrible thing in the future that one
day our technology and knowledge causes
individuals to be so powerful that they
can create almost any harm so he doesn't
want individuals to become empowered to
create harm or so empowered us to create
harm but the to create harm part of that
sentence that that that phrase to create
harm is superfluous if you're not
empowered to create harm then you're not
empowered at all empowerment means you
could do good or you could do evil and
so with whatever amount of power you
have the power could be used to do good
or to not do good to create or to
destroy this has always been the case
every person that has ever been born has
the capacity to create or to destroy to
do good or to do evil bostrm is
concerned that in the in the distant
future any one of us will have too much
power to do harm but the to do harm is
is pointless
he's really worried about too much power
he does want individuals to have too
much power and so this is really another
fracture point between the pessimist and
the optimist between collectivists and
individualists s' between those who have
an optimistic view of humanity and our
people are creators who want to do good
who want to solve their problems and
those who are very skeptical of the
entire project of humanity and people
and so therefore they demand a kind of
collectivism that we need to have again
a committee a king an elected group
something at the top that can keep
control of everyone else of all the
solutions to our circumstance but the
problems that we have this one is the
most terrifying to me this tyranny this
kind of belief because we've had it so
many times before that some No
better for everyone else it's not a
denial of the idea that there are evil
people or that some people do want to
destroy it's an acceptance of that idea
and that the only solution to that idea
is for the good people the good
individuals to make progress faster and
they will make progress faster if
they're allowed to if they're
constrained by a state or authorities or
committees or something else then yes
their progress is going to be slowed in
some way and that causes them to have a
great disadvantage compared to perhaps
people who refuse to obey the rules and
who want to do some destruction at the
moment we're not in that situation at
the moment what we have is a relative
freedom such that individuals who who
are good can pursue solutions and can
make progress and can create while the
people who want to destroy they make
some progress sometimes and cause some
destruction at times but generally
they're sorted we can't create an
unproblematic state and this idea that
we have some top-down imposition of
control on all the individuals because
we don't want them to become too
empowered to create harm is a recipe for
disaster it assumes that we can prevent
problems but problems are inevitable
okay so that's the vulnerable world
hypothesis let me put that one aside for
the moment now there's a there's
something else called the doomsday
hypothesis and I really want to come
back to that this is something that
bostrm himself didn't invent but he's a
great supporter of and so I'd like to
come back and I'll criticize that after
a little bit more from the beginning of
infinity so returning to the book now
finally here David writes both the
future of civilization and the outcome
of a game of Russian roulette are
unpredictable
but in different senses and for entirely
unrelated reasons Russian Roulette is
merely random although we cannot predict
the outcome we do know what the possible
outcomes are and the probability of each
provided the rules of the game are evade
the future of civilization is unknowable
because the knowledge that is going to
affect
has yet to be created hence the possible
outcomes are not yet known let alone
their probabilities let me just repeat
the possible outcomes are not yet known
let alone their probabilities this is
the fatal blow against people who use
Bayesian reasoning in order to predict
predict I say predict prophesy the
future of civilization into the far
distant reaches of time it's not
possible because we don't know what
knowledge we'll have in the future that
will affect the future back to the book
the growth of knowledge cannot change
that fact on the contrary it contributes
strongly to it the ability of scientific
theories to predict the future depends
upon the reach of their explanations but
no explanation has enough reach to
predict the content of its own successes
or their effects or those of other ideas
that have not yet been thought of just
as no one in 1900 could have foreseen
the consequences of innovations made
during the 20th century including whole
new fields such as nuclear physics
computer science and biotechnology so
our own future will be shaped by
knowledge that we do not yet have we
cannot even predict most of the problems
that we shall encounter or most of the
opportunities to solve them let alone
the solutions and attempted solutions
and how they will affect events people
in 1900 did not consider the internet or
nuclear power unlikely they did not
conceive of them at all pause they are
just my reflection on that short section
when we have prognostications about the
far future by people where experts or
otherwise this is the problem we do not
even have the tools to properly imagine
what the future will be like now there
is actually even a profession of sorts
that has become ascendant recently the
futurist if you've heard of them well at
least enough to profession that you can
apply for people start calling
themselves futurists and they get
employed by businesses and educational
institutions to try and predict trends
so these futurists they they they
declare what the trends are liking this
or that particular field and then on the
basis of the way things are
extrapolate guess what the future is
going to be like of course this is not
just based on the knowledge we have
about what the present is it's it's
basically a bias of the knowledge that
they have about the present state of
Technology and so things so forth
but the future is going to be about
knowledge not yet created it's not going
to be wildly guessed by a futurist if it
was then the futurist wouldn't be a
futurist there'd be an inventor or a
scientist or creator in some sort but
what a futurist does is wildly guess
about the future where as actual
progress happens through hypothesizing
conjecturing and then testing and
instantiating these guesses into
technology by people whose names we
don't yet know for the most part so
let's go back to the book David writes
no good explanation can predict the
outcome for the probability of an
outcome of a phenomena whose course is
going to be significantly affected by
the creation of new knowledge this is a
fundamental limitation on the reach of
scientific prediction and when planning
for the future it is vital to come to
terms with it
following popper I shall use the term
prediction for conclusions about future
events that follow from good
explanations and prophecy for anything
that purports to know what is not yet
knowable trying to know the unknowable
leads inexorably to error and
self-deception among other things that
creates a bias towards pessimism for
example in 1994 the physicist Albert
Michelson
or is it Mickelson I hear physicists say
and say both at times so let's call him
Albert
Mickelson for the moment made the
following prophecy about the future of
physics the more important fundamental
laws and facts of all physical science
have all been discovered these are now
so firmly established that the
possibility of their ever being
supplanted in consequence of new
discoveries is exceedingly remote our
future discoveries must be looked for in
the six places of decimals Albert
Mickelson address at the opening of the
Ryerson Physical Laboratory University
of Chicago 1894 now I had that book just
by the way
my little books in the background there
I probably should have put which I do
have somewhere other the end of science
by John Horgan John Horgan is it was one
of the sorry someone who's interviewed
David Deutsch about the beginning of
infinity but the end of Sciences kind of
it says some wonderful things about the
progress of science at a time but
concludes we've just about discovered
everything that we can possibly hope to
discover and hence the end of science
terribly mistaken but he could take note
of exactly what's being written here as
well hey I'll continue with the
beginning of infinity and David writes
what exactly was Mickelson doing when he
judged that there was only an
exceedingly remote chance at the
foundations of physics as he knew them
would ever be superseded he was
prophesying the future how on the basis
of the best knowledge available the time
that consisted of the physics of 1894
powerful and accurate though it was in
countless applications it was not
capable of predicting the content of its
successors it was poorly suited even to
imagining the changes that relativity
and quantum theory would bring which is
why the physicists who did imagine them
on Nobel Prizes Michelson would not have
put the expansion the universe or the
existence of parallel universes or the
non-existence of the force of gravity on
a list of possible discoveries whose
probability was exceedingly remote he
just didn't conceive of them at all so
it's not that so I'll just pause there
um that's the important point to
emphasize he just didn't conceive of
them at all and Mickelson was a smart
person you know one of the greatest
physicists of all time of the
michelson-morley experiment you know he
helped to disprove the existence of the
aether showed that when it came to did
did does Direction matter does a
relative motion matter when you're
measuring the speed of light as it turns
out no null hypothesis is correct it
makes no difference who you are when
you're taking a measurement of the speed
of light you will always get the same
result so he figured this out great
experimentalist brilliant though he was
he couldn't conceive of the discoveries
in his own field of expertise that were
about to change the course of physics
completely now it's at this point that
unfortunately my camera fails now for
those listening on audio this makes
absolutely no difference whatsoever but
if you are watching and you'll notice
that my camera has disappeared and
instead I've just put some photos in
this doesn't go on for the remainder of
the entire video and I do manage to fix
it up but just as a warning for everyone
the lesson there should in everyone's
mind be lit up in neon lights it doesn't
matter how brilliant you are even within
your own field it is very difficult for
you to predict what's going to happen
next let alone what's going to happen in
fields far removed from your field of
expertise let alone in all fields in all
fields that might affect the evolution
of civilization anyone who pretends to
know what's going to happen in the
future
so-called futurists the pessimists who
are predicting global catastrophes they
think that they can predict the
knowledge yet to be created and in all
cases they think that that knowledge yet
to be created will be insufficient to
solve the problems of today let alone
the problems of tomorrow and this is
pure prophecy its pessimism it's false
back to the book a century earlier the
mathematician Joseph Louis Lagrange had
remarked that Isaac Newton had not only
been the greatest genius who had ever
lived but also the luckiest for the
system of the world can be discovered
only once
Lagrange would never know that some of
his own work which he had regarded as a
mere translation of Newton's into a more
elegant mathematical language was a step
towards the replacement of Newton's
system of the world mickelson did live
to see a series of discoveries that
spectacularly refuted the physics of
1894 and with it his own prophecy like
Lagrange Michelsen himself had already
contributed unwittingly to the new
system in this case with an experimental
result in 1887 he and his colleague
Edward Morley had observed that the
speed of light relative to an observer
remains constant when the observer moves
at this astoundingly counterintuitive
fact later became the centerpiece of
Einstein's special theory of relativity
but but Michelson and Morley did not
realize that was what they had observed
observations are theory Leyden given an
experimental oddity we have no way of
predicting whether it will eventually be
explained merely by correcting a minor
parochial assumption or by
revolutionising entire Sciences we can
know only after we have seen it in the
light of a new
explanation in the meantime we have no
option but to see the world through our
best explanations which include our
existing misconceptions and that biases
our intuition among other things it
inhibits us from conceiving of
significant changes now that idea that
an experimental result if it apparently
refutes a long-established explanation
it can't cause us to reject that
explanation not yet this is the in a
sense it's it's a version of the Jew hem
Quine thesis that when you do have this
apparent experimental falsification of a
theory you can never be sure you don't
know whether or not you've actually
shown the theory to be false or if
there's something about your
experimental apparatus your assumptions
something else about the way you've
conducted the experiment that is flawed
so is it the experiment that was false
or was it the theory that was false this
is jus hem client thesis now Johan corn
problem says that given that logical
possibility that you can't make progress
in science or the progress in science
therefore isn't possible because you can
never know well that's wrong it's wrong
because clearly we make progress in
science so progress in science happens
just in spite of this and once we have a
better theory then we can tell which of
these two things is actually true is it
either the long-established theory has
now been refuted by the experimental
result or is the experiment in some way
flawed and both of these things have
happened over the history of size for a
case where the theory has been falsified
well there are the famous occasions like
for example where we're deciding between
Newtonian gravity and general relativity
and we do edingtons experiment of the
bending of starlight during a solar
eclipse and we refute Newton's gravity
and therefore we think that Einstein's
theory of general relativity is closer
to the truth it's a better explanation
it solves their problems etc for a case
of the other kind where we have an
experimental result and it appears to
refute special relativity because we see
neutrinos traveling faster than light at
the Large Hadron Collider we find later
on that a cable was loose in the
experimental apparatus something like
that and so we find that it's not
special relativity that has been refuted
or relativity but rather the experiment
itself has been poorly done so again if
this does not prevent us from making
progress in science this is all well
known to people somewhat versed in and
pop Aryan epistemology but people keep
on rediscovering the jus hem climb
phases and think they have a knockdown
argument against actual epistemology but
this is false so if if there are no
other reasons for doing philosophy one
reason might be to just stop you from
putting your foot in your mouth when you
see if you've refuted a very well-known
objection to a poorly understood
philosophy namely preparing an
epistemology this thing here about also
seeing the world through our existing
explanations and therefore our existing
misconceptions biases our intuition
david says among other things that
inhibits us from conceiving of
significant changes yes and it's it
seems glaringly obvious especially in
physics until it's almost a culture in
physics remarkably so according to one
school of thought in physics but you
know maybe this this this school of
thought is no longer on the ascendancy
but it's still pervasive this one school
of thought is that we reduce everything
to the smallest possible units and to
unite the forces governing them and we'd
be done so that what we what we should
do in physics is aim to reduce
everything to the smallest possible
units or the smallest possible particles
and figure out what are the forces that
are governing all of these fundamental
particles if we managed to achieve that
then we're done we'd have a grand
unified theory and then if we could
figure out a way of unifying these
forces with gravity we'd have a
so-called theory of everything
as if gravity and the other forces are
everything but they're not they're not
even everything within physics let alone
everything outside of physics the
question as to why some explanation
unites gravity and the other fundamental
forces why that explanation should have
been correct or not some other will
still need answering and you know
astrophysics geophysics biophysics they
want to stop physics won't end and even
particle physics won't end if we unify
all the forces we've still want to know
we'd we'd still wish to know if there
are smaller particles still that these
fundamental particles what we think of
fundamental demand truly are fundamental
it would be like thinking prior to that
I always think of this as it's kind of
reminiscent of well prior to the
completion so-called completion of the
periodic table say once we found element
number 118 that we'd have a chemical
theory of everything and that then
chemistry would be over well no that
would be absolutely ridiculous with a
completed periodic table we've barely
even begun the periodic table is kind of
a starting point for chemistry in many
ways it's not an end in itself now just
before I begin reading the next
paragraph I just want to highlight how
little progress I've made into this
chapter already because well let me read
let me read the paragraph when the
determinants of future events are
unknowable how should one prepare for
them
how can one given that some of those
determinants are beyond the reach of
scientific prediction what is the right
philosophy of the unknown future well
it's a rational approach to the
unknowable to the inconceivable that is
the subject of this chapter so we're
kind of still here in the introduction
I'm afraid I will move a little faster
now so let me continue with the book the
terms optimism or pessimism have always
been about the unknowable but they did
not originally Referral e to the future
as they do today originally optimism was
the doctrine that the world past present
in the future is as good as it could
possibly be the term was first used to
describe an argument of Lee
at 16 46 to 1716 that God being perfect
would have created nothing less than the
best of all possible worlds label it's
believed that this idea solved the
problem of evil which I mentioned in
chapter 4 he proposed that all apparent
evils in the world are outweighed by
good consequences that are too remote to
be known so then David writes about Lee
blitz and leave let's have this idea
that the best always happened because if
you change anything apparently for the
better in some way you know some little
Kitty's starving on the street corner if
if God did something such the little
kitty wasn't starving on the street
corner and suffering in the way that
they were suffering then if God was to
change that then something else would be
affected elsewhere in the universe such
that the overall net effect would be
worse than what we currently have so
this is Leibnitz idea of the best of all
possible worlds but as David observed
you could have an anti Leibnitz
philosopher who believes in the worst of
all possible worlds such that the world
is the way it is and it's as terrible as
it possibly can be and if you changed
and if you changed one thing then
something else would change such that
things would be better or you could have
a world exactly halfway between these
two or any other percentage that you
like maybe it's exactly 30% evil and 70
percent good so none of this is
particularly helpful
okay so I'll skip past that part and
begin again David writes you never date
usage a common saying is that an
optimist calls a glass half full while a
pessimist calls it half empty but there
are those attitudes are not what I am
referring to either there matters not a
philosophy but of psychology more spin
than substance the terms can also refer
to moods such as cheerfulness of
depression but again moods to not
necessitate any particular stance about
the future the CITES Minh Winston
Churchill suffered from intense
depression yet his outlook on the future
of civilization and his specific
expectations as wartime leader were
unusually positive conversely the
Economist Thomas Malthus
Turia's prophet of doom of whom or below
is said to have been a serene and happy
fellow who often had his companions at
the dinner table in gales of laughter
blind optimism is a stance towards the
future it consists of proceeding as if
one knows that the bad outcomes will not
happen the opposite approach blind
pessimism often called the precautionary
principle seeks to ward off disaster by
avoiding everything not known to be safe
no one seriously advocates either of
these two as a universal policy but
their assumptions and their arguments
are common and often creep into people's
planning skipping just another short
paragraph about the Titanic and then
David writes but blind pessimism is a
blindly optimistic doctrine it assumes
that unforeseen disastrous consequences
cannot follow from existing knowledge -
or rather from existing ignorance not
all shipwrecks happen to record
record-breaking ships not all shipwrecks
happen to record-breaking ships not all
unforeseen physical disasters need be
caused by physics experiments or new
technology but one thing we do know is
that protecting ourselves from any
disaster foreseeable or not or
recovering from it once it has happened
requires knowledge and knowledge has to
be created the harm that can flow from
any innovation that does not destroy the
growth of knowledge is always finite the
good can be unlimited
there will be no existing ship designs
to stick with nor records to stay within
if no one had ever violated the
precautionary principle so present this
pause day and this is my reflection just
in brief the present concerns about
climate change for example there's been
some hot herbally recently like we've
only got 10 years left but the people
who say we've only got a hundred years
left certain prominent politicians would
raise these sort of numbers now they
might not even actually be taken too
seriously by anyone other I worry about
young people who otherwise haven't heard
these ideas before and so this is kind
of a form of propaganda that's being put
out there it is it is worrying now kind
of dog whistles
to the extent that such specific
prophecies you know the world will end
in ten years due to climate change for
the extent they are taken seriously it's
terribly blind pessimism about people it
says that nothing that we are able to do
over the next ten years is going to
change the course of its going to change
the course of this problem we're not
going to be able to create the knowledge
and that is terribly pessimistic ok so
David writes because pessimism needs to
counter that argument ok just so just
from that argument was that progress has
happened ok in order to bring us to the
point where we are right now
progress has happened so therefore the
precautionary principle has never been
used before so David it's written
because pessimism needs the can of that
argument in order to be an all-purpose
persuasive a recurring theme in
pessimistic theories throughout history
has been that an exceptionally dangerous
moment is imminent
our final century the book by Martin
Rees makes the case that the period
since the mid 20th century has been the
first in which technology has been
capable of destroying civilization but
that is not so many civilizations in
history were destroyed by the simple
technologies of fire and the sword
indeed of all civilizations in history
the overwhelming majority haven't been
destroyed some intentionally some as the
result of plague or natural disaster
virtually all of them could have avoided
the catastrophes that destroyed them if
only they possessed a little additional
knowledge such as improved agricultural
military technology better hygiene or
better political or economic
institutions very few if any could have
been saved by greater caution about
innovation in fact most had
enthusiastically implemented the record
Airy principle more generally what they
lacked was a certain combination of
abstract knowledge and knowledge
embodied in technological artifacts
namely sufficient wealth let me define
that in a non parochial way as the
repertoire of physical transformations
that they would be capable of causing an
example of a blindly pessimistic policy
is that of trying to make our planet as
unobtrusive as possible in the galaxy
for fear of con
with extraterrestrial civilizations
Stephen Hawking recently advised this in
his television series into the universe
he argued him if extraterrestrials ever
visit us I think the outcome would be
much as when Christopher Columbus first
landed in America which didn't turn out
very well for the Native Americans he
warned there might be nomadic space
dwelling civilizations who had stripped
the earth of its resources or
imperialist civilizations who would
colonize it the science fiction writer
Greg bear has written some exciting
novels based on the premise that the
galaxy is full of civilizations that are
either predators or prey and in both
cases they hiding this would solve the
mystery of the Fermi problem but it is
implausible as a serious explanation for
one thing it depends on civilizations
becoming convinced of the existence of
predator civilizations in space and
totally recognizing themselves in order
to hide from them and totally
reorganizing themselves in order to hide
from them before being noticed which
means before they have invented say
radio okay I think I've got my camera
back now so I'll continue Hawking's
proposal also overlooks various changes
of not making our existence known to the
galaxy such as being inadvertently wiped
out of benign civilizations send robots
to our solar system perhaps to mine what
they consider an uninhabited system and
it rests on other misconceptions in
addition to the classic floor of blind
pessimism one it's a spaceship earth
idea on a larger scale the assumption is
that progress in a hypothetical
rapacious civilization is limited by raw
materials rather than by knowledge what
exactly would it come to steal gold oil
perhaps our planets water surely not
since any civilization capable of
transporting itself he or raw materials
back cross galactic distances must
already have cheap transmutation and
hence does not care about the chemical
composition of its raw materials so
essentially the only resource of used to
it now solar system would be the sheer
mass of matter in the Sun the matter is
available in every star perhaps it is
collecting entire stars wholesale in
order to make a giant black hole as part
of some Titanic engineering project but
in that case it will cost it virtually
nothing to omit in half
solar systems which are presumably only
a small minority otherwise it is
pointless for us to hide in any case so
would it casually wipe out billions of
people would we seem like insects to it
this can only seem plausible if one
forgets there can be only one type of
person Universal explainers and
constructors the idea that there could
be beings that are to us as we are to
animals is a belief in the supernatural
so this is a crucially misunderstood
point it is a rare opinion the vast
majority of people and thinkers on this
topic believe in the intelligence
continuum the intelligent continuum is
this idea that well you've got bacteria
they can't do much except smell their
environment and respond to it and then
you've got I don't know plants I respond
a little bit more insects a bit more
fish or and someone you keep moving up
the hierarchy of genetic complexity and
then you have people you know we're at
the top but we're just it's a matter of
degree the difference between us and
let's say chimpanzee and a chimpanzee
and a dog and a dog and a cat in a cat
and a rat and so on it goes down I think
this idea is false I think there's a
qualitative difference between us who
can explain the world and form
explanatory theories about the wall
which enable us to gain control of the
world in every other animals that we
know of that exists it doesn't for many
explanations and as a victim of its
environment rather than a controller of
the environment this is a stark
difference all other animals are on some
kind of continuum if you like in the
ways in which they can respond to the
environment around them I can't explain
it they can't control it but some can
respond better than others there's very
little all that a bacteria can do if the
environment responds much an individual
bacteria is going to
get too hot and die get too cold and die
in Canada too many chemicals and die the
bacteria can't do much but at least an
animal can run away if the temperature
gets too hot or too cold the food
becomes too scarce and so on humans can
of course change their environment in
order to suit us so that we don't have
to run away we can build structures
around us in order to remain in places
that are otherwise hostile we can create
technology and this idea that aliens out
there as Stephen Hawking is worried
about might treat us like insects is a
very well subscribed idea Sam Harris
certainly believes in this idea that
there could be something out there that
has such a high degree of intelligence
that it's more moral than us in a way so
and there could be there could be evil
aliens out there as well I think this is
just a cultural meme it's an ancient
cultural meme I would suggest going back
to the times when they were good and bad
gods they they needed appeasing whether
they were good or bad but the bad gods
had all the powers that the good gods
had but they had no care or love for
people more more recently over recent
decades we've replaced the idea of gods
with science fiction entities and so in
Star Trek you have the evil aliens and
you have the good ones as well they both
have super advanced technology and so
when actual scientists kind of don't
move beyond these ideas it's not exactly
refreshing what is refreshing is david
deutsch in rejecting this obvious way of
thinking this standard way of thinking
that we've had for millennia of
all-powerful beings some of them are
good and some of them are bad once you
understand once you understand the
argument that David Deutsch is making
about how progress that happens in one
area physics epistemology it cannot be
completely disconnected from progress
that happens in another area like
morality it becomes pretty obvious why
these obvious ways of thinking that
other people have are completely false
one assumption of course that this all
rests upon about these evil aliens is
that morality is subjective and that is
close to universally subscribed and so
it's amazing to me that even people who
purport to believe in objective morality
like sam harris reject the idea that we
would converge on that objective
morality so the aliens would discover a
better morality than we do and that
would not entail wiping us out that
would not entail causing us to suffer
that would entail helping us to learn
what they've learned ok so back to the
back to the book David writes moreover
there is only one way of making progress
conjecture and criticism and the only
moral values that permit sustained
progress are the objective values the
Enlightenment has begun to discover no
doubt the extraterrestrials morality is
different from ours but that will not be
because it resembles that of the
conquistadors nor would we be in serious
danger of culture shock from contact
with an advanced civilization you will
know how to educate its own children or
AIS so it will know how to educate us in
a particular to teach us how to use its
computers so again me talking here why
people think knowledge can be
partitioned in this way such that
advancements in one area could mean
regression in another area is a mystery
it's certainly a prejudice aliens who
make scientific progress will make moral
progress we can travel to the other side
of the galaxy the new morality is
probably galaxies ahead as well the same
is true of a gir an artificial general
intelligence the same arguments hold if
we think it's an advance to reduce
suffering let's say in the universe why
would aliens or super advanced
artificial intelligence conclude
otherwise if they can understand so much
more about physics and computation and
engineering science broadly then we can
and faster than we can why should we
imagine that I'm not that when it comes
to the topic of morality
these super intelligent beings by thy
aliens or artificial general
intelligence why would we imagine they
must be more primitive than we are that
they won't care about other conscious
creatures how could they survive as long
as they have if they did think that if
they did think that killing other beings
was a way to make progress okay so this
is my bookend for the end of part 1 as
it turns out this is going to be a
three-part epic but I think if any
chapter deserves a three-part epic it is
the chapter on optimism I do apologize
for the long detour during this
particular episode all about nick
bostrom who in fact is to be fair barely
even mentioned in the beginning of
infinity indeed he's only mentioned once
and it's to do with his singularity
argument nothing to do with his
pessimism really I suppose this part one
has really been an introduction to set
the scene for what's to come in parts
two and three where I promise they'll be
more quoting until then
[Music]
you